NAME
    tea - run a program, watch its output line by line, and act on what it prints

SYNOPSIS
    tea [GLOBAL OPTION...] COMMAND [COMMAND...] -- PROGRAM [ARG...]
    tea --deadline DURATION -- PROGRAM [ARG...]
    tea -h | --help
    tea --version
    tea -l | --list-signals

DESCRIPTION
    tea starts PROGRAM as a child process, reads its standard output and standard error line by line, and runs a chain
    of COMMANDs on every line. A command is a set of conditions (which lines it applies to) and actions (what to do
    with them): rewrite or color the line, send a signal to PROGRAM, write to its standard input, or decide the exit
    code of tea. Lines that no command changes pass through unchanged, so tea can be dropped in front of any
    program. Typical uses are "wait until the program prints X, then stop it", "give up if X does not appear within
    two minutes" and "answer a prompt".

    The name is a nod to tee(1): like tee, tea sits in the middle of a data stream. Unlike tee, the stream is the
    output of a process that tea itself started, which is what makes it possible to act on the process.

  Lines and commands
    Lines are read without their trailing newline; the default output suffix adds it back. For every line, tea goes
    through the commands in the order they were given. A command applies to a line when it is enabled, the line
    comes from a stream the command listens to (see --std-err, --std-all) and its patterns match. When it applies,
    all of its actions are performed, then the next command is evaluated, unless an action changed the flow
    (--next-line, --skip-to). Output actions of several commands combine by "last one wins": the last mark, prefix,
    suffix or color set on a line is the one written.

    The first command starts with the first command level option. Further commands start with -c. A command may be
    named (-c NAME) so that other commands can enable, disable, toggle or jump to it.

  Streams and command chains
    By default tea keeps two copies of the command chain, one for standard output and one for standard error, and
    processes the two streams in parallel. Command state (enabled or disabled) is therefore independent per stream,
    and so is everything that depends on it. The exit code (--set-exit-code, --exit) is shared. --share-commands
    keeps a single chain for both streams; --share-streams merges both streams into one, as if everything came from
    standard output. Time based commands are always single instances, see below.

  Time based commands
    A command with --no-input-for or --timeout has no "current line". It is evaluated by a timer, once per second,
    independently of the chains, and there is exactly one instance of it however many chains there are: --enable,
    --disable and --toggle from any chain act on that instance, and its own --enable, --disable and --toggle actions
    act on every chain. Time based commands cannot use patterns, --std-err, --std-all or any output action.

  Standard input
    tea forwards its own standard input to PROGRAM and closes PROGRAM's standard input when its own reaches end of
    file, just as if PROGRAM had been started directly. Commands can also write to PROGRAM's standard input
    (--send-input, --send-input-file) and close it (--close). All of this goes through one ordered queue, so PROGRAM
    receives everything in the order it was produced, and PROGRAM not reading its standard input never delays the
    processing of its output. --no-stdin turns the forwarding off; see there for when you need it.

  Output buffering
    tea can only react to a line once PROGRAM has actually written it. Many programs buffer their standard output
    when it is not a terminal and flush it only when the buffer is full or when they exit, which would make tea see
    nothing for a long time and then everything at once. What helps depends on how PROGRAM was written:

    C and C++ (glibc stdio, dynamically linked)
        By default tea runs PROGRAM through stdbuf(1), which asks glibc to line-buffer standard output and standard
        error. stdbuf replaces itself with PROGRAM (same process id) after setting the environment, so nothing else
        changes. It has no effect on statically linked programs, on setuid programs, on programs that set their own
        buffering, and on programs that do not use glibc (for example Alpine/musl binaries); use --no-stdbuf if
        stdbuf itself causes trouble (it prints a warning when its helper library cannot be loaded).
    Python
        Ignores stdbuf and block-buffers standard output when it is a pipe. Start it as "python3 -u ..." or set
        PYTHONUNBUFFERED=1. Standard error is line-buffered on recent versions.
    Perl, Ruby
        Ignore stdbuf and block-buffer standard output when it is a pipe. Perl: "$| = 1" or "perl -e '$|=1; ...'".
        Ruby: "$stdout.sync = true". Both can also flush explicitly.
    Go, Rust, Node.js, Java
        Ignore stdbuf, but usually do not need it: Go writes to os.Stdout unbuffered, Rust's stdout is
        line-buffered, Node.js writes to pipes synchronously, and Java's System.out flushes on println. Anything
        that adds its own buffering (bufio.Writer, BufWriter, BufferedWriter) must be flushed by the program.
    Shell scripts
        Shell builtins (echo, printf) are flushed immediately, but every external program the script runs has its
        own buffering, as described above. stdbuf's setting is inherited by those programs.
    Programs that change behaviour on a terminal
        Some programs print progress with carriage returns and no newline, or print different (often less) output
        when standard output is not a terminal. tea only sees complete lines, so progress bars drawn with "\r" are
        invisible to it until a newline arrives. If a program insists on a terminal, run it under script(1) or
        unbuffer(1) and let tea watch that.

  Exit status
    By default tea exits with the exit code of PROGRAM. If PROGRAM is terminated by a signal, tea exits with 255
    and reports the signal on standard error. --set-exit-code and --exit override this; --clear-exit-code restores
    it. Usage errors and fatal runtime errors (a line longer than --line-buffer-size, an unreadable
    --send-input-file) exit with 1.

GLOBAL OPTIONS
    Global options may appear anywhere before "--".

    -h, --help
        Print this help and exit.

    --version
        Print the build time, branch and commit and exit.

    -l, --list-signals
        List the available signal names and numbers and exit.

    --pid FILE
        Write the process id of PROGRAM to FILE when it has started, and delete FILE when tea exits. FILE must not
        exist beforehand.

    --line-buffer-size SIZE
        The longest line tea accepts, in bytes. The default is 65535, the minimum is 1024. A longer line is a fatal
        error.

    --no-stdbuf
        Start PROGRAM directly instead of through stdbuf(1). See "Output buffering" above.

    --no-stdin
        Do not read tea's own standard input. PROGRAM's standard input is then written only by --send-input and
        --send-input-file, and closed only by --close or when PROGRAM exits. You need this in two situations:
        when tea runs in the background of an interactive shell, because a background job that reads the terminal
        is stopped with SIGTTIN; and when tea is started with its standard input already at end of file (from
        cron, or with "< /dev/null") while a command uses --send-input, because the end of file would otherwise be
        forwarded immediately and PROGRAM's standard input closed before anything could be sent.

    --stop-signal SIGNAL
        The signal that --exit and --deadline send to PROGRAM. The default is SIGTERM. SIGNAL is written as for
        --signal.

    --deadline DURATION
        Give up after DURATION unless tea has finished by then: stop PROGRAM with the stop signal and exit with
        code 1. Equivalent to a final command "-c --timeout DURATION --exit 1"; write that command out if you need
        another exit code. On its own, "tea --deadline 30s -- PROGRAM" runs PROGRAM with a time limit.

    --share-commands
        Use a single command chain for both streams. Lines from standard output and standard error are processed
        one at a time by the same commands, so --disable, --enable and --toggle affect both streams. Cannot be
        combined with --share-streams.

    --share-streams
        Merge standard output and standard error of PROGRAM into one stream and treat every line as standard
        output. --std-err, --std-all and --mark-stderr are rejected with this option. Cannot be combined with
        --share-commands.

COMMANDS
    A command consists of command level options. Conditions select lines, actions do something with them, and a
    few options control the command's state.

  Starting a command
    -c, --command [NAME]
        Start a new command. The first command is started implicitly by the first command level option, so -c is
        only needed to start further commands or to give the first one a name. NAME must not be empty, must not
        start with "-" and must be unique.

  Command state
    A disabled command is skipped entirely: its conditions are not evaluated and its actions are not performed.
    Commands are enabled unless created with --disabled; --enable, --disable and --toggle change the state at run
    time. Enabling a disabled command also restarts its --timeout clock.

    --disabled
        Create the command disabled.

    --line-enabled
        Enable the command at the beginning of every line.

    --line-disabled
        Disable the command at the beginning of every line, so that it only applies to the rest of a line on which
        an earlier command enabled it.

  Pattern conditions
    -p, --pattern PATTERN
        A regular expression in Go syntax (https://pkg.go.dev/regexp/syntax); for example "(?i)ready" matches
        case-insensitively. A command may have any number of patterns. With no pattern, the command applies to every
        line it listens to. With several patterns, all of them must match unless --or is given.

    --or
        Apply when at least one pattern matches instead of all. Requires at least one pattern.

    --no
        Invert the match: apply when none of the patterns match, or, together with --or, when at least one pattern
        does not match.

    --std-err
        Listen to standard error instead of standard output.

    -a, --std-all
        Listen to both standard output and standard error.

  Time based conditions
    See "Time based commands" above for what these commands can and cannot do. Durations are written like 10s,
    1m30s or 500ms; conditions are checked once per second.

    --no-input-for DURATION
        Apply when no line has arrived on either stream for DURATION. The actions run once per quiet period: after
        they ran, the command waits for a new line and another quiet DURATION before it applies again. Add
        "--disable NAME" (with -c NAME) if it should apply only once overall.

    -t, --timeout DURATION
        Apply once DURATION has elapsed since the command was last enabled: since PROGRAM was started for a command
        that is enabled from the start, or since --enable or --toggle enabled a command created with --disabled.
        The actions run once. Enabling the command again restarts the clock, which makes deadlines relative to an
        event possible (see EXAMPLES).

    --or-timeout DURATION, --min-match-time DURATION
        Reserved; not implemented.

  Output actions
    These change how the current line is written. Lines from standard output go to standard output and lines from
    standard error to standard error unless redirected. When several commands set the same property on a line, the
    last one wins.

    --set-prefix PREFIX
        Write PREFIX before the line. The default prefix is empty.

    --set-suffix SUFFIX
        Write SUFFIX after the line. The default suffix is a newline, so a suffix without one joins lines.

    -m, --mark MARK
        For a line read from standard output, write MARK instead of the line, without prefix or suffix. "-m ."
        prints one dot per line; an empty MARK suppresses the line. The mark is chosen by the stream the line was
        read from, not by where it is written.

    --mark-stderr MARK
        Like --mark, for lines read from standard error.

    --send-to-stdout, --send-to-stderr
        Write the line to the given stream regardless of where it was read from. A later command can redirect it
        again.

  Color actions
    Colors and attributes are written as ANSI escape sequences around the line, its prefix, its suffix or its mark.
    They are only emitted when tea's standard output is a terminal. Attributes given in one command combine; the
    color of the last command that set one wins, it does not modify the previous one. COLOR is one of black, red,
    green, yellow, blue, magenta, cyan, white, or a high intensity variant hi-black, hi-red, hi-green, hi-yellow,
    hi-blue, hi-magenta, hi-cyan, hi-white.

    --fg-color COLOR
        Foreground color.

    --bg-color COLOR
        Background color.

    --bold, --faint, --italic, --underline, --blink, --blink-rapid
        Text attributes.

  Input actions
    See "Standard input" above for ordering and forwarding.

    -i, --send-input INPUT
        Write INPUT to PROGRAM's standard input, exactly as given: tea does not interpret escape sequences, so add a
        trailing newline yourself if PROGRAM expects a line (in bash, $'y\n' is the string y followed by a newline).
        If PROGRAM's standard input is already closed, or PROGRAM has exited, the input is dropped and a warning is
        written to tea's standard error.

    -f, --send-input-file FILE
        Write the contents of FILE to PROGRAM's standard input. FILE is read when the action runs, so it need not
        exist when tea starts, but it must exist by then: an unreadable FILE is a fatal error. Within one command,
        --send-input is written before --send-input-file. A missing final newline is not added.

    --close
        Close PROGRAM's standard input, after the inputs of the current line have been written.

  Signal and exit code actions
    -s, --signal SIGNAL
        Send SIGNAL to PROGRAM. SIGNAL is a number or a name, case-insensitive, with or without the SIG prefix
        (SIGTERM, TERM and term all work); --list-signals prints the names. Several matching commands send their
        signals in order.

    -e, --set-exit-code CODE
        Use CODE (0..255) as the exit code of tea instead of PROGRAM's. There is one exit code; the last command to
        set it wins, and time based commands can set it between lines.

    --clear-exit-code
        Undo --set-exit-code: tea exits with PROGRAM's exit code again unless it is set once more later.

    -x, --exit CODE
        Stop PROGRAM with the stop signal (SIGTERM, or --stop-signal) and use CODE as the exit code of tea: the
        usual way to say "seen what we were waiting for, done" (--exit 0) or "give up" (--exit 1). It is a shorthand
        for "--signal STOP_SIGNAL --set-exit-code CODE" and cannot be combined with --signal, --set-exit-code or
        --clear-exit-code in the same command; use those directly for other combinations.

  Control flow actions
    --enable NAME, --disable NAME, --toggle NAME
        Enable, disable or toggle the command called NAME, which may come before or after this one. Each may be
        given several times in one command. A command may enable or disable itself, which is the usual way to make
        it apply only once; it cannot toggle itself, since a disabled command never runs and could only ever switch
        itself off.

    -n, --next-line
        Stop evaluating commands for the current line. The line is written as processed so far.

    --skip-to NAME
        Continue with the command called NAME, which must come later in the chain. Skipped commands are left as
        they are. If NAME is disabled, evaluation continues with the next enabled command after it.

EXAMPLES
    Wait until "operation completed" appears in the output of a program, then interrupt it:

        tea -p "operation completed" -s INT -- command

    Wait until a PostgreSQL container reports that it is ready, then stop watching its logs and exit with 0. If it
    is not ready within two minutes, stop watching and exit with 1:

        docker start pg && tea -p "ready to accept connections" --exit 0 --deadline 120s -- docker logs -f pg

    The same without the shorthands, interrupting "docker logs" with SIGINT instead of SIGTERM:

        docker start pg && tea \
            -c -p "ready to accept connections" --set-exit-code 0 --signal SIGINT \
            -c --timeout 120s --set-exit-code 1 --signal SIGINT \
            -- docker logs -f pg

    Reload nginx once no request has arrived for ten seconds. While waiting, print a dot per request instead of the
    access log line:

        (tea -m . -c --no-input-for 10s --exit 0 -- tail -f /var/log/nginx/access.log) && killall -HUP nginx

    Interrupt a program 30 seconds after it prints "phase 2 started", and not before:

        tea -p "phase 2 started" --enable deadline -c deadline --disabled --timeout 30s -s INT -- command

    Answer a prompt from a script, then let the program finish on its own (--no-stdin because a script's standard
    input may already be at end of file, which would otherwise close the installer's standard input at once):

        tea --no-stdin -p "^Continue\? \[y/N\]" -i $'y\n' -- ./installer

    Run a program with a time limit, and color its error lines red:

        tea --deadline 1h --std-err --fg-color red -- ./long-job
